




THE SECRET PLACE OF THE MOST HIGH 
By Tony Marshall Anderson 
Author of 





DEDICATED 
To 
The Whole Family of God on Earth 





INTRODUCTION 

After hearing Brother Anderson preach on the ninety-first Psalm, I requested him 
to publish it. My reason was that my soul was fed, my faith invigorated, my 
spiritual life enriched. We greatly need spiritual riches these days when there 
is so much to dampen and deaden us in our Christian lives. 

I welcome with high appreciation such helps as you will find here. The opening 
of this Psalm is a fine example of true exposition as well as a source of 
spiritual quickening. May God richly bless it as it goes forth bearing its 
helpful message to the saints. 


I have followed the custom of reading some book of this type with much profit in 
connection with my daily devotional Bible study. I commend both this book and 
this method to all. 

C. W. Butler 





FOREWORD 

It has been our conviction for some time that the people of God should be 
assisted in every way to a better understanding in the things which are freely 
given them of God. This little volume we have prepared with this end in view. If
those who read it can be enabled to see the gracious privileges accorded the 
saints and derive spiritual value from it we shall have been compensated fully 
for our labor of love. 

Some have thought that this psalm is not a present heritage of the holy people; 
but that it points to their future happiness in the Millennium. We have not seen
fit to so interpret it. To our heart it offers present consolation. In it we 
see the inheritance of all who are sanctified by faith. It pictures the blessed 
state of all who dwell by faith in a conscious experience of holiness before 
God. 

The psalm is a conversation between three persons: God speaks in the closing 
verses, and reveals His will concerning the man who sets his love upon Him. 
Perhaps David and Solomon are the other speakers. David gives his testimony in 
the opening words. In this he describes the state of grace of which the holy 
place in the temple was a type. Solomon speaks in verse two, and reveals the 
manner of faith which is essential to enter into this holy place. 

The scope of the promises contained in the will of God made to His holy people 
covers every thing in the plan of God for them from preservation to final 
salvation in heaven. It confirms the fact that He is able to save to the 
uttermost them that come unto Him. 

We trust that God shall use this little book to establish His people in faith, 
and hope and love.

T. M. Anderson 





THE SCRIPTURE LESSON 

Psalms 91 He that dwelleth in the secret place of the most High shall abide 
under the shadow of the Almighty. 2 I will say of the LORD, He is my refuge and 
my fortress: my God; in him will I trust. 3 Surely he shall deliver thee from 
the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome pestilence. 4 He shall cover thee 
with his feathers, and under his wings shalt thou trust: his truth shall be thy 
shield and buckler. 5 Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night; nor for 
the arrow that flieth by day; 6 Nor for the pestilence that walketh in darkness; 
nor for the destruction that wasteth at noonday. 7 A thousand shall fall at thy 
side, and ten thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee. 8 
Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of the wicked. 9 
Because thou hast made the LORD, which is my refuge, even the most High, thy 
habitation; 10 There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come 
nigh thy dwelling. 11 For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep 
thee in all thy ways. 12 They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash 
thy foot against a stone. 13 Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder: the young
lion and the dragon shalt thou trample under feet. 14 Because he hath set his 
love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on high, because he 
hath known my name. 15 He shall call upon me, and I will answer him: I will be 
with him in trouble; I will deliver him, and honour him. 16 With long life will 
I satisfy him, and show him my salvation. 





THE SECRET PLACE OF THE MOST HIGH

It is evident that the Psalmist refers to the Holy of holies as being the secret
place of the Most High. Into this sacred place only a priest may enter. The 
people remained without, trusting to the priest to represent them before God, 
Whose Presence dwelt within this sacred enclosure. It was not their privilege to
enjoy such close and intimate relationship with God. 

But it was not in the plan of God that this order should continue forever. Under
a new covenant, God promised that all should come to know Him from the least to
the greatest. The way into the holiest was to be opened to all the people of 
God through the blood of Christ. Of Him it is said, "By His own blood He entered
in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us" 
(Heb. 9:12). 

Again we read, "Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest 
by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which He hath consecrated for 
us, through the vail, that is to say, His flesh; and having a High Priest over 
the house of God; let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, 
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with 
pure water" (Heb. 10:19,22).

Through the Spirit the Psalmist had seen these thing with the eye of faith. The 
holy place in the temple being a type of the spiritual and the heavenly, the 
Psalmist saw that it should become the privilege of all the people of God to 
enter this place and dwell in the Presence of God as priests and kings. As it 
was a place on earth where a man could come into the Presence of the Most High, 
so should there be a state of grace through Christ which should give a man a 
conscious sense of being in the Presence of God.

In the experience which it signifies, all believers, can in this life, enter 
into the very Presence of God by faith, and dwell before Him in holiness and 
righteousness all the days of their lives.

It is a new and living way which is opened to them. Those who enter it shall 
live in the light of His face, for they see God. They shall live in the light of
His glory, for their light has come, and the glory of the Lord hath risen upon 
them. They shall live in His love, for they dwell in love. They shall live in 
His will, for His pleasure rests upon them. In this place the heart is purged 
from all conscious sense of sin; and God has received them into holy fellowship 
with Himself. 





HE THAT DWELLETH IN THE SECRET PLACE OF THE MOST HIGH 

Since we see that the secret place of the Most High when stated in terms of 
Christian experience is the grace of holiness into which all believers may enter
through faith in Christ, we come next to a study of the results and nature of 
this gracious state of grace. 

These results are shown in the promises of God made to His holy people in all 
ages of the world. We find them in both the Old Testament and the New; and see 
them included in the covenants of promise made in each dispensation. 

The secret place of the Most High is a place of soul rest. Those who enter this 
place find the promised rest. David recognized this, for he said in this psalm, 
"Thou hast made the Most High thy habitation." The one who spoke the words of 
the second verse saw it to be a "refuge and fortress." A To enter into holiness 
is to enter into God. He becomes the habitation, the home of rest for the soul. 
Outside of Him there is no rest from cares, frets, and worries. In Him only is 
there peace of mind, quietude of spirit, and rest unto the soul.

Holiness results in a sense of security in the love and grace of God. It brings 
the sweet consciousness that all shall be well with him who trusts and obeys the
Almighty Father.

It is a delightful experience to have an end to wanderings in an unstable and 
unsettled condition of life. Assailed by doubts, tormented by fears, discouraged
by failures, betrayed by deceitful lusts, and troubled at the thought of 
judgment, one cannot rest and be happy in his religion. Something must come to 
end these things, and still the voice of conscience with the full assurance of 
faith. Holiness is the end of these distressing things in the life and heart, 
and results in bringing the believer to rest in God. The secret lace is then the
place of rest to the soul. 

But this proves not only to be a resting place, but also a state of rest while 
we journey. "My Presence shall go with thee. and I will give thee rest" 
(Ex. 33:14). This promise accords with the promise made by our Lord that He 
would be with us unto the end. This is rest in journey. All of God's people are 
travelers to the land of perfect rest; but as they journey they are surrounded 
by designing foes and cruel enemies. God's Presence with them shall give them 
rest from the strife of tongues, and the wrath of men and devils. 

Many are the needs of His people as they pass through this world, but His 
Presence with them shall supply all their needs according to His riches in 
glory. They are a faltering and weak people, but His presence shall support them 
in times of weakness, and comfort them in moments of fainting. He shall make 
them to ride on the high places of the earth in victory, and obtain honey from 
the rock, and oil from the flinty rocks of trial and sore affliction 
(Deut. 32:9-13). 

The blessings promised to all who dwell in His Presence in the Holy place are 
many; and shall be found sufficient to meet every emergency in life. His people 
shall rest in confidence of sufficient grace for help in every time of need. 
They live surrounded by the God of all grace like one surrounded by the four 
walls of a city of refuge, or a strong fortress. They have ever in sight the 
cloud by day, and the fire by night. God has beset them behind and before, and 
laid His hand over them. They rest under the shadow of His Almightiness. 

God's sanctified people have rest in service performed for Him. His yoke is easy
and His burden is light. They work for Him constantly, yet never tire of the 
work. They may grow weary in it, but never weary of it. This is according to 
promise. "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in 
heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls." These rest in perfect fellowship
with Him in the yoke of service. They are never left alone to toil and sacrifice 
for He is ever yoked with them. They ever learn of Him how to perform in 
meekness and humbleness of heart. They are at rest in the fellowship of service, 
having found the heart of Jesus as a resting place. Pride and self-will are 
destroyed in the nature, and rest from these disturbing causes is obtained. To 
enter into perfect fellowship with Jesus in the yoke of service, we learn the 
nature of His heart. To know His heart, is to experience in our heart what He is 
in heart. If He is meek and lowly in heart, and our hearts come to know this in 
experience, then have we rest from the pride and self-will so inimical to our 
peace. A people who labor in the Master's service without feeling pride and 
self-will will never be weary in well doing. The flatteries and persecutions
from the wicked shall not disturb their serenity of spirit. And where the Lord 
is there will His servants be also, because His interests are their interests. 





THE SECRET PLACE OF THE MOST HIGH 
IS THE PLACE OF SOUL SATISFACTION 

The place of His Presence is the place of contentment because it is the answer 
of the heart cry, "Show us the Father, and it sufficeth us." Love is consummated
in this place of holiness, for there God gives Himself to us, and we give 
ourselves to Him. In this relationship there is satisfaction; it is the 
satisfaction of possession. We know that in matters of life and business 
satisfaction is obtained by possession. The possession of wealth, or power, or 
place, or friends gives contentment. This is true with respect to religion; for 
if we do not come to possess the object of our devotions, our religion is vain, 
and does not satisfy the heart. 

A religious profession that does not know God can never prove satisfactory to 
any person. It may be held as a matter of form; but it has no life in it to 
appease the soul with the assurance of fellowship with God. A profession of 
holiness may be empty and void and far from satisfactory because it is not 
holiness in reality, but in name only. True holiness brings to the soul the 
conscious sense of God, as real as the High Priest in the holy place was 
conscious of God. The testimony given by the holy people is that they were made 
to know Him in a manner which fully satisfied their hearts when they came into 
the blessing of holiness. It was this note of satisfaction which the psalmist 
sounded when he said, "He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High 
shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty." This is a testimony to a state of
complete satisfaction of soul. 

In this place the soul is satisfied with righteousness. "Blessed are they which 
do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled." To be 
filled, is to be filled with that righteousness for which they hungered; and 
means to be filled with satisfaction in possession of righteousness. Those who 
are in the secret place are, "Before Him in holiness and righteousness." 

There is such a thing as being satisfied with righteousness. It is a state of 
heart purity which does not need improvement in quality; it is satisfactory 
before God, and to our conscience. There is no further longing for a greater 
degree of purity; this has been received in its fullest measure. A sanctified 
man is a satisfied man. He is not satisfied in the sense that he has no desire 
to learn more about God, and how to serve Him more perfectly in a becoming 
manner: but he is satisfied in heart, because he is perfected in holiness before
God. This is a finished matter; the quality of which cannot be improved. 

The belief current among many professing Christians is that none ever come to a 
state of satisfaction in righteousness, but that they must daily seek it. This 
is contrary to scripture and to experience. "He has perfected forever them that 
are sanctified." By His offering of Himself, Jesus has made it possible to end 
sin in the heart, and perfect it forever in holiness. When He cleanses from all 
sin, there is no more sin to be cleansed from. This state gives satisfaction to 
the hungry heart by filling it with righteousness. 

Those who are dwelling in the secret place of the Most High live a life of 
constant victory. They are privileged to live without a break in their 
fellowship with God. This is not saying that holy persons may not grieve the 
Spirit. But it is saying that the normal state of holiness before God is a life 
of constant victory over all temptations. Provision is made in Christ's 
atonement for His people that do sin; but no justifiable excuse is offered for 
them. God has made ample, provision for victory; but no excuse is offered for 
defeat. He considers that His grace is sufficient for all. This life is shown in
these words of the prophet, "That we might serve Him in holiness and 
righteousness before Him, all the days of our life." The duration of the service
of a people so delivered is to be all the days of their lives; in days of trial
from friends and foes; in days of Sickness, and in days of health; in days at 
home or away from home. Let a day bring forth what it will, these are prepared 
for it. 

The secret place is a dwelling place before God. This means that it is a place 
where holy people live their lives before God. They are citizens of this holy 
state and are obedient to its holy laws. These have taken a permanent abode in 
God's holy place; they are governed by the laws of the Most High. They keep 
themselves in this place and the place keeps them. 

Under another figure of holiness God says it is a way. "It shall be called the 
way of holiness. The wayfaring men, though fools shall not err therein." This 
serves to show us this life of victory is constant and unbroken. Those who 
travel it are kept on it, being guided by it like the rails guide the train. The
way itself keeps them even though they are ignorant in many respects. Let all 
who dwell in this holy place, and travel on this holy way with God, see to it 
that they continue to dwell there by faith and obedience to its holy laws, and 
God will give them grace to make them more than overcomers and conquerors. 







THOSE WHO DWELL IN THE SECRET PLACE HAVE FULLNESS OF JOY ALWAYS 

In His Presence is fullness of joy; at His right hand there are pleasures 
evermore. This joy comes from the mutual relationship which exists between the 
Lord and His people. They are His joy, and He is their joy. His joy remains in 
them, and their joy is full. 

Joy is a pleasant emotion produced by that which is pleasing to the desires. God
desires the love of His holy people; He is pleased when they set their love upon 
Him. Jesus urged His disciples to continue in love for Him and for each other 
that His joy might remain in them. By His joy remaining in them, He meant, that 
He would continue to have pleasure in them. So long as God is pleased with us 
our joy will be full. In the state of holiness a man is in a place where God is 
ever pleased with him as He was with Enoch; and gives him the testimony of His 
pleasure. 

This is a state of joy unspeakable and full of glory. This is proven by the fact
that the slightest grieving of God results in a perceptible loss of joy. One who 
has lost all joy has lost God. 

With the incoming of the Holy Ghost there is the setting up of the Kingdom of 
God in the heart. This kingdom in the heart is righteousness, peace, and joy in 
the Holy Ghost. It is a state of holiness, rest and joy, produced by the inbeing
of the Spirit. Each of these becomes an important part of the life of a 
Christian. 

This joy is the support and comfort to the heart in times of trial and deep 
sorrows. But it remains only so long as we continue in favor with God, and dwell
in His presence in holiness. It never subsides, but ever flows like a fountain 
in the heart of the abiding saint. 

Paul shows its worth in the following words: "Rejoice in the Lord alway; and 
again I say, Rejoice. Let your moderation be known unto all men. The Lord is at 
hand." The cause for rejoicing was that the Lord was at hand. Read it thus, "The
Lord is present." His Presence with the apostle in prison was what produced the
joy. What matter where we are, if the Lord is with us, let us rejoice. No prison 
walls can rob a saint of joy, because a prison cannot keep the Lord away from 
His people. This joy is independent of circumstances and conditions; it comes 
from the Presence of the Lord. Those who dwell in the secret place dwell in His 
Presence, and have fullness of joy. 





ABIDING UNDER THE SHADOW OF THE ALMIGHTY 

"He shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty." This promise is made to all 
who dwell in the secret place of the Most High. In it we are to behold the happy
estate of God's holy people who dwell in His Presence in the holy place. They 
are to be over-shadowed by His Almighty Power, and live in the light of the love
of the Almighty Father. 

To these God has revealed His sevenfold Will. In the last three verses of the 
Psalm God speaks: He promises that He will do seven things for them who set 
their love upon Him. We find this promise to contain the perfect will of God 
concerning His people. This Will shall be the overshadowing of the Almighty 
under which they shall abide. 





I WILL DELIVER HIM 

In this promise we are to rest our hearts in full assurance; it is a promise of 
preservation. The scope of deliverance is as vast as the needs of the people. It
matters not what the nature of their trials may be, there is no exception in any 
case: "I will deliver," saith the Almighty. No power against them shall ever be 
greater than the Almighty Power which overshadows them. He that is for us is
greater than all that is against us. This promise of deliverance is confirmed 
to the people of God in the testimony of the Psalmist contained in verses three 
to thirteen. To this witness God adds His own promise, "I will deliver him." In 
the mouth of these two witnesses this word is established to His saints. 

"Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler." In this phase of 
the promise of preservation, God pledges Himself to deliver his people from that 
form of temptation which appeals to the appetites and desires. A snare was a 
baited trap. It was baited with such tempting foods as appealed to the creature. 
The food was not a form of evil, it was something which appealed to a normal 
desire; yet to obtain it one would fall into a snare of the enemy. In this we 
see that Satan can use things which are not evil to snare the children of God. 
The things used to compass the fall of the first man were not evil, they were 
but a bait in the snare of the Tempter. It was not an evil desire to desire 
knowledge; neither was it wrong to look upon the beautiful, as Eve looked; nor 
was it sin to desire food. But these things were used to snare the soul, and 
place those taken in it in the power of the enemy of God. 

When Satan tempted our Lord he resorted to those things which made appeal to the
normal desires. Food was suggested to Jesus after he had fasted for forty days. 
Thus a strong appeal was made through His natural appetite. The glories of the
earth were shown Him, thus appealing to His desire to make the kingdoms of the 
earth the Kingdom of God. An escape from suffering was offered Him through a 
short cut, inferred in the proposition of Satan that He cast himself from the 
pinnacle of the temple. In this way the Lord could have deceived the people by 
appearing as if He had descended from heaven in bodily form. He would have 
escaped the suffering of the cross. It was not a sin to desire to escape 
sufferings, but it was wrong according to the plan of God for the world's 
redemption. Thus the devil baited his snare with that which appealed to the 
natural desires. 

In such moments God has promised a way of escape to all His people. He will make
them wise to see the hand of Satan in the matter, so they may be delivered from
him. 

In this promise is revealed a promise of special wisdom to be given the elect. 
There is nothing that warrants us to say that God will exercise a power in their
behalf, at such times of temptation, that will force them to refuse it; but it 
does imply that they shall be made to see the design of the devil, so that they 
may escape by refusing him as Jesus refused him. 

It will be well with the soul who wisely considers these things. Through the 
natural desires for wealth, companions, friends, property, health, pleasure, 
knowledge, and a host of other things, some have been taken captive by Satan. 
God will surely deliver all who flatly refuse to compromise themselves in God's 
sight in order to have these things. To abide under His shadow one must deny 
himself. If it means poverty, so might it be. If it means loneliness, God will 
not leave His people, even if all others do. 

God has a way by which all desires of His people are satisfied. They do not have
to seek things from the devil. Every good gift, and every perfect gift comes 
from God. All that is necessary to supply the needs of both body and soul God 
will give. It is not necessary to do evil to obtain what is good in this life. 
No good thing will He withhold from them that walk uprightly. Having food and 
raiment therewith be content. Beware of the snare of the fowler. See the snare; 
and not the bait, and wisely refuse to be enticed and destroyed. 

"And from the noisome pestilence." From this He will deliver His people. In this
figure of a noisome pestilence we understand that there are temptations which 
are like subtle emanations, like a stench from something putrid. It is something
which continually annoys like a pest. Temptations that are a nuisance. The 
deliverance granted to the elect in this situation does not always end the 
misery by banishing the cause, it rather proves to be an opportunity for God to 
give more grace so they may endure it. God receives greater glory by preserving 
His people in the midst of annoying circumstances, than He would if He removed 
the cause of the trouble. Blessed is the man who has seen this through anointed 
eyes. 

There are many annoying trials which pester the people of God. They do not 
assume great proportions becoming giants that attack; they are like a stinging 
insect, or a monotonous noise which keeps the nerves on edge, and disturbs rest. 
Such trials that irritate, ruffle, and aggravate. How blessed is the promise of
deliverance. 

Trials of this nature are caused by persons who have not bridled the tongue. It 
seems they never run out of news of the sort that does not edify, neither does 
it contribute to the peace of the home, the church, or the town. These human 
pests can cause more pain and misery than a swamp infested with annoying 
insects. The sting of their words is felt in every place. Were it not for God's 
grace they would be intolerable to bear. Hardly a church exists on earth that 
does not have an affliction of this sort. It has produced backsliding, schism, 
and discord among the believers. Well saved is the man who has been delivered 
from this noisome pestilence; and has kept sweet, kind, and patient under the 
annoyance to his religious peace. There is no known method for the extermination
of these trials; but there is a deliverance promised to all who dwell in the 
secret place of the Most High. They shall be saved from the strife of tongues. 

The eccentricities of persons constitute an annoyance from which one must be 
delivered if he would have peace. The art of getting on with all kinds of 
persons is learned from Jesus. He was nagged and pestered by the curious; He was
misunderstood by His relatives and friends; He was wearied by the crassness of 
His disciples; He was persecuted by His enemies. Despite all this He had the 
bearing of a King, the dignity of God, the sympathy of a friend, the love of a 
brother, and the patience of the pure. In the midst of the pestilence of 
humanity He never failed once to display the nature of God. "As He is, so are we
in this world." Jesus was delivered, He was kept from the noisome pestilence 
when He lived in the midst of it. Let every child of God draw upon Him for such 
a deliverance. 

"Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night; nor for the arrow that flieth
by day." Here is a promise of deliverance from fear: the fear of the unseen 
evils that approach in the darkness; and from the fear of the swift and sudden 
evils that fly like an arrow in the day. 

In this figure God has shown His people that there is Divine protection from the
things which take them unawares. Things that come by surprise like a terror in 
the night. Things that happen by accident like a stray arrow may kill an 
innocent person. This deliverance is designed to give the saints rest of mind 
and spirit. "Under his feathers shalt thou trust." He shall cover thee with His 
wings so that thy protection may be assured. Can you see the hen hovering her 
brood, shielding it with her own body from the blasts and the foes? Her brood 
does not consider it a risk to sleep under her protection. Shall we be restless 
as one that takes a risk? Shall we not trust and be at peace. The devil cannot 
hurry us off to heaven before God has finished with us here. No accidents will 
befall His saints. Every thing shall come to them by His permission, and not by 
mere chance. The saints are not creatures of mere chance subject to the 
happenings of the world. They are a protected family, He that keeps them never 
slumbers nor sleeps. He is never off guard, nor taken by surprise, either day or
night. He is able to keep that which we have committed to His care. We have 
placed in His care our souls, our bodies, our life, our works, and know whom we 
have believed, and are persuaded He is able to keep all committed to Him against
that day. 

There are temptations which approach like a terror out of the night. They can 
not be seen until they are upon us. The prince of darkness commands evil persons
who under cover spawn their dark deeds and send them forth to trouble the 
saints. God must preserve His children from the black lies of their foes, and 
from the dark treachery of their enemies. So great is the malice of the wicked 
that they would early destroy the righteous with dark persecutions and vicious 
lies were they not prevented by the Almighty. Were it not that God did preserve 
His workmen, no faithful preacher could stand before sinners and condemn their 
sins and live. They would starve him and assassinate him, and utterly forbid him
to minister if God did not defend him. The early church with its fiery ministry
is an example of Divine preservation. They survived in the midst of impending 
doom, and threats of death. The powers of darkness did not quench their zeal, 
nor dampen their ardor. They were not afraid of the terror of darkness. 

The arrow that flieth by day may mean open defiance and persecution by bold and 
wicked men. If so there is deliverance from them. It may mean accidents as we 
think of the term. This is not to say that good men may not suffer by what some 
may call an accident, as a misfortune to body or mind. Many good men have been 
killed in wrecks and by disasters on land and sea. But who will say that it was 
because God had relaxed His vigilance? Who knoweth the Divine will in the 
matter? Even these things for which there is no explanation now, do not make 
this promise of deliverance of no effect. 

God will preserve His saints from evil, and save them' from sin which only can 
kill eternally. Open persecution, and hold wickedness, and avowed opposition, 
shall not be stronger than the hand that guides the life entrusted to His care. 
Saints may die as martyrs but they shall die holy, and not as sinners. They will 
die in battle, but not perish in retreat. They shall be more than conquerors 
through Him that loves them. 

Mark these words, "A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy 
right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee." That which destroys others by 
thousands shall not destroy one saint whom God is pleased to deliver from 
death." Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of the 
wicked." God's people shall not suffer as do the wicked who have not made the 
Most High their habitation. Some authorities say this properly rendered means 
that the saints of God shall be so panoplied with might that they shall win in 
battle with a thousand enemies on a side, and ten thousand adversaries on the 
right hand. God shall help them to overthrow all forces arrayed against them. It 
must have been this which Pilgrim saw. He tells us of the host of devils that 
were gathered about one old and feeble woman whom God had made strong by His 
grace. There are many witnesses on the side of righteousness who have fought 
their way against such great odds because God hath strengthened them with might 
by His Spirit. He fights for them as a father that defends His children. 

"Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder." This is part of the promise of 
deliverance. In this figure of the lion and the adder God shows His preservation
from trials that are strong as a lion, and trials that are subtle and deadly as
a serpent. We are told in scripture that the Devil is like a roaring lion, 
walking about, seeking whom he may devour (1 Pet. 5:8). Under this figure we are
able to see a method of attack by the devil. The lion with a terrible roar 
startles the timid creatures, and stampedes them; in their confusion they break 
cover and run in wild fright to escape, and thus fall prey to the foe. Some 
temptations are so sudden and terrible that they startle and confuse holy 
persons. The adversary accuses them of things which are utterly false, yet so 
terrible that they lose their heads and would give up if God did not deliver 
them. God enables them to resist the enemy steadfast in the faith. Their hearts 
are not to faint with discouragement; they are to strengthen their spirits by 
faith in Him Who is Almighty. 

Persons newly in the experience of holiness are subjected to these attacks more 
than mature saints. They are suddenly thrust into what appears to be darkness 
and fears. It seems like some impending disaster hangs over them. Their feelings
are depressed and joy seems gone. They have no knowledge of what caused it. It 
came upon them suddenly like a cloud over the face of the sun. This is the lion 
attack of the devil. A restful faith in God during this storm, with a prayer 
that pleads the blood of hope, will result in victory. God shall not suffer 
those to be tempted above what they are able to bear. To them is the promise, "I
will deliver." 

Temptations which are like an adder reveal another method of Satan's attack. The
adder is a very small serpent; its bite is certain death. Strange as it may 
seem, the poison is painless. Those who are bitten by it die without pain like 
one that goes to sleep. They die in a sleep induced by the poison. 
How much do we need the protection from such a temptation. A death produced by a
poison which causes souls to sleep the sleep of death. In such a state the sin 
into which they have fallen has rendered them unconscious of their fate. It has 
deadened their consciences numbed their feelings, killed their faith, and 
destroyed their love. Such are dead while they live on earth. Stung to death by 
the asp of some secret sin which has been kept hidden as a serpent. Struck down 
by a small but deadly evil. The deliverance promised is that God will prevent 
such a fate from befalling believers if they will heed the warning given in 
time. There is certainly a way by which 

God can make known to His people their danger before they are within a striking 
distance from this form of sin. Some who have survived the roaring of the lion 
of temptation have succumbed to the sting of the asp. They decried the open and 
flagrant sins of the age, but were smitten by some hidden evil which was small 
but deadly. The public amusements, and worldly fashions may not capture some 
with their roaring attractions. But the asp of pride, self will, deceit, 
prejudice, self-esteem; selfishness, and such like, may have been indulged 
rather than destroyed. The poison of these things can enter the soul like the 
poison of a serpent can enter the body. Some have given up to them, who were 
once clear escaped from them; death, painless and terrible, has crept as a sleep
over their souls. Look to Him for deliverance, lest this form of temptation 
overtake you. That God will enable His people to tread upon these things is the 
promise. They shall be masters and not servants through grace. 

"The dragon shalt thou trample under feet." This is a promise of victory over 
imaginary evils. Trials that do not exist outside of the mind. There is no such 
creature as a dragon. It is a mythical beast, having no reality or existence. It
may seem strange that any person should be troubled and distressed with things 
which are purely mental, and serve to frighten like a ghost story. In this group
of persons reside those who worry, and fret; they are anxious and restless; not
because of things real but because of what they think things are going to be, or 
what they believe will surely happen. They live in a nightmare of fear about 
things that have not happened but which they fear will. They see defeat where 
God has promised victory. They see failure where God has promised success. They 
see barrenness where God has promised fruit. If God fails their prediction shall
come true; the dragon of mist shall take form; but until He does fail let us not 
be faithless but believe. The great nation of China has failed to develop her 
vast resources because to dig into the mountains for coal, or minerals, or drill 
for oil, they feared they would strike a dragon. Thus the years have been 
wasted, stolen from them by their mythical dragon. How true it is that many 
persons have been deceived by the tempter, and have been robbed of years of 
useful life in a happy Christian experience because they lived in fear of what 
has never existed outside of their own distorted imagination. Those who live in 
this realm are yet children with childish fears of the dark, and of the terrible
things that hide there. By the eye of achieving faith we see the victory, the 
fruit of our toils, the answer to our prayers, the realization of our hopes, and
the ultimate success of our undertakings. The dragon of fear dissolves before 
the rising sun of His coming glory. Darker may grow the day about us, but 
brighter shines the day before us. Kingdoms may fall about, but one that cannot 
be moved is ahead of us, the earth shall perish, and the utter dissolution of 
all things shall come, but we see a new heaven and a new earth wherein dwelleth 
righteousness. Thank God we can tread upon the dragon of fear because God makes 
us to conquer. 

In this psalm God has not only told His people that from which He will deliver 
them, but has also told them how He shall deliver them. "I will deliver," saith 
the Lord. The Almighty pledges Himself as deliverer. All that He is by nature is
placed at the disposal of the saints. His power to make them strong; His 
intelligence to make them wiser than their adversaries; His Presence to assure 
them of support; His love to comfort them in distress. 

Also "His truth shall be thy shield and buckler." His truth contains promises 
for all times and circumstances; and these will be invariably fulfilled to them 
that trust in Him. The fulfillment of a promise relative to defense and support 
to the soul is what a shield is to the body. It is the duty of saints to store 
their minds with His truth to have as a shield of defense against the day of 
trial. 

Our Lord withstood Satan by saying, "It is written." What God has said is the 
last word on any matter, rest on His word and be saved. 

"He shall give his angels charge over thee." Evil spirits may attempt to injure 
thee; but they shall not be able. His angels have a special charge to accompany, 
defend, and preserve thee, and against their power, the influence of evil 
spirits cannot prevail. His angel, when necessary, shall turn the steps of a 
good man out of the danger that is in his way. They will ward it off when it 
comes in his path. These shall minister to the children of God as they 
ministered to the Son of God. They may be tempted in a wilderness, but that 
wilderness shall be filled with His ministering spirits sent to minister to the 
heirs of salvation. 

It is said of the angels that they shall, "Keep thee in all thy ways." The way 
of a son of God is the way of obedience; it is the path of duty. In this way is 
safety, for His angels will bear thee up in their hands lest thou dash thy feet 
against a stone. They will prevent injury and falling in this holy way. 





I WILL SET HIM ON HIGH 

A wealth of meaning is contained in this promise made to him who dwells in the 
secret place of the Most High. It means that he has been exalted to a place of 
honor, and accorded privileges which belong only to such as the Lord is pleased 
to ennoble. Like Joseph was taken from prison by Pharaoh and made to have charge 
of matters involving great responsibilities, and was exalted to a place of great 
honor and power; so God lifts persons who set their love upon Him, and elect to 
make Him their portion, to places of power, and authority, and riches in 
spiritual things. 

He exalteth His holy people to the place of kings and priests unto Him. This 
involves responsibilities such as belong to the office of kings and priests; but
implies that He Who has deigned to honor them, will enable them to fill these 
places as becometh saints. God's grace releases the best there is in a man, and 
devotes his entire talents to the service of God in all its branches. But this 
implies also, that God will give grace and strength to him, thus enabling him to
exercise his gifts and talents in such a manner as to redound to the highest 
glory to God. When the Almighty sets a man on high, He frees him from all that 
has imprisoned him; crowns him with the glory of His love and grace, and places 
him in a position of power and authority to do service in the name of the Lord. 

Many places in the New Testament we find such exalted positions revealed as 
being the will of God for His people. 

There is an exalting from a place of servants to that of friends. "Henceforth I 
call you 'not servants; for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but I 
have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have 
made known to you" (Jno. 15:15). Our Lord states His reason for this honoring of
His disciples. A slave has no part in the affairs of his master other than to 
render duty. He is not consulted in matters of importance, neither is he made to
share in a way that friends of the master are made to share. But when elevated 
to the place of friends there is fellowship with the Lord in a place of honor in
his Presence. 

From this we see that Jesus exalts His people to a place of equality in His love
like His place in the love of the Father. "As the Father hath loved me, so have
I loved you." Likewise they are honored by having a part in knowing the things 
of the Father and the Son. 

This fact reduced to its simple terms of spiritual truth means that the saints 
are exalted to the place where God, through Christ, can more and more reveal His
nature and His will to them. By this their lives shall be made lives of 
everlasting joy and pleasure as they revel in the glories of His Presence, and 
discover depths and heights of God never known before. They shall be made to 
increase in the knowledge of God. They shall go from glory to glory in knowledge
and revelation of God. He shall reveal to them His moods, His ways, His 
pleasures, and His doings. 

These who are His friends are in a position to know His commandments concerning 
all things pertaining to their lives, and that pertaining to His interests in 
the world. "Ye are My friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you." Obedience is 
not only a proof of friendship with Christ, but it is the result of friendship. 
A true friend of His knows what His commandments are, and because they love Him, 
they do those things which He has commanded. 

The truth so clearly revealed in this language of our Lord concerning His people
being His friends is, that they are to have revealed to them the whole program 
of God concerning their services for Him; and that they shall be prompted by the
Spirit, and constrained by love to perfectly obey Him in all things. At no time
shall they be in doubt as to His will concerning them; neither shall they ever 
be wanting in power to perform it. The saints of God are made to feel they have 
a part in the great plan of Christ in the world; and giving themselves wholly to
the cause of Christ, furnishing Him with the human agency so necessary to the 
furtherance of His work in the earth. It is apparent from this scripture that 
all who dwell in the secret place of the Most High are exalted to a place of 
intimate friendship with God; and from Him learning what to do that will please 
Him, they promptly do of His good pleasure. 

There is an exaltation to a place of power. This is clearly revealed in the 
promise, "I will set him on high." God elevated David to a throne of power. God 
will lift the weakest man to the place of highest authority, and by him confound
the mighty, and bring to naught the wisdom of the wise, if He can have His way 
with that man. Many proofs' of this are written in the pages of history which 
record the' achievements of the saints. One wishing to walk through God's hall 
of fame, has only to read Hebrews, chapter eleven. These worthies had been set 
on high, and by faith they exercised the authority vested in them. 

All who dwell in the secret place of the Most High have come into a relationship
with God of trustworthiness. They are pure, and because of this, they are 
empowered. This is clearly set forth in the words of our Lord, "If ye have faith
as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to 
yonder place: and it shall obey you; and nothing shall be impossible unto you" 
(Matt. 17:20). 

The possession of such a faith places one in command of such power that 
mountains can be removed, and nothing shall be impossible unto him. There are 
possibilities in every man like there is a life in a seed. Potentially every 
child of God is a king as every American boy is a president. The possibilities 
are there, he needs only to be put into office to be vested with the authority. 
Perhaps this is a crude way of expressing this great truth, but the fact before 
us is that God's holy people are put into possession of power that is 
all-sufficient by virtue of the place of exaltation which He gives them. It is 
evident that they do not remove the mountain by their labors; it is removed by a
force which they command. I watched with keen interest a steam shovel at work. 
It lifted with ease a truck load of rock and dirt. It removed a hill with small 
effort on the part of the operator. I had no authority over this power, but this
man did. The man did not remove the hill, he had harnessed a power which served
him. So is it with the people of God; they are set on high. They have at their 
command the power of Omnipotence which makes all things possible unto them. Such
faith laughs at impossibilities and cries, It shall be done. 

God's people must realize that power is a result of relationship. It is given 
only to the people who are dwelling in the holy place with God. The essential 
thing is to dwell there, and God will give power to perform all things. This 
fact is so important that we will consider one more promise regarding it. "Ye 
shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you." No matter how 
this passage is rendered, it shows that power follows after the Spirit comes 
upon the believers. But the Spirit did not come upon them for the sole purpose 
of empowering them: He was given for the purpose of sanctifying them, and 
bringing them into perfect conformity to the will of God. When such a 
relationship as this is established, power follows as a result. It comes after 
purity. The Holy Ghost brings believers into an experience of grace, called by 
the psalmist, the secret place of the Most High, because it is the grace where 
saints dwell in the presence of God in holiness. The result of this grace is, 
they are empowered, or set on high like kings with authority. 

Since we are considering power as a result of relationship it will be well to 
consider the purpose of power. When God wills to set His people on high it is 
because He wills to make them useful, as well as honorable. They have kingly 
prerogatives in order that they may serve the King of kings. It is apparent to 
all that power is for service; which service is included in the term, witnesses. 
We are His witnesses before the world that it might believe on Him for 
salvation. Hence fruit bearing is the important thing in a Christian experience. 

There is power for fruit-bearing. But power for bearing fruit is the result of 
abiding in Him. This corresponds with the experience of dwelling in the secret 
place of the Most High. Those who dwell there are set on high, and by that power
given them bring forth fruit to glorify God. 

Jesus had much to say on the matter of fruitfulness. In the parable of the vine 
and branches He taught that a fruitful life was an abiding life. Without Him we 
can do nothing. This means that apart from Him we are impotent, and cannot beget
souls by our ministry and service. Barren lives, and fruitless ministries are so 
much in evidence around us, that a word on this matter is not amiss. Too many 
professing Christians are withered branches; in vain do they look for fruit 
which never can be produced because they are apart from Him. A broken 
relationship results in a barren ministry, and a fruitless life. Some have never
entered into the secret place with God, and their fruitless lives are not the 
result of a break with Him; but a result of having never entered the experience. 
They have lived on little, when they should have had much; they have done a few 
things when they might have done many things; results have been meager, when God 
willed they should bear much fruit. 

There lies at the door of the church a crippled world like the lame man lay at 
the beautiful gate of the temple. Power to lift it up is vested in all who have 
been with Jesus in the Holy place. The other crowd may be in the majority, but 
have no help to give, because they have received no power to serve in such high 
and honorable service. If all would enter the secret place of the Most High they
would be elevated to a high place, and rendered capable of giving a lift to the
impotent world that lies at our very doors. You cannot lift one higher than you
have gone; neither can you give what you have not received. 





HE SHALL CALL UPON ME, AND I WILL ANSWER HIM 

Here is a promise made to the people dwelling in the secret place of the Most 
High that their prayers shall be answered. The promise is clothed in simplicity 
of language. It is not involved in complicated and difficult conditions; the 
simple statement is, "He shall call upon Me, and I will answer him." This leaves
no room for doubt. 

The assurance of answered prayer rests upon relationship to God. This promise 
belongs to the dwellers in holiness before God. In this relation they are 
accorded the prerogatives of priests which give them access to God always. They 
ever dwell in His Presence, and there make their requests known to Him, being 
fully assured that He hears them in whatsoever they ask. 

God cannot deny the prayer of a people to whom He has made such promises, and 
made recipients of such benefits. 

The fact that prayer rests upon relationship to Him is shown in the great prayer
promises. "If our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. And
whatsoever we ask we receive of Him." The place of the uncondemned heart is in 
holiness before God. Confidence is a result of this condition of heart. Bold are
they toward God who have entered into the holy place of His Presence. The Father 
will hear them in this secret place and reward them openly before all men. Upon 
them shall rest the glories obtained through unbroken communion with God. 

Such confidence does not overstep its rights and become brazen familiarity. It 
asks according to the will of God. The people who have such confidence are in 
accord with the will of God; and they ask only that which accords with His will. 
They are governed by the knowledge of His will. So assured are the saints that 
God will answer when they call that it is said to them: "We know that he 
heareth us whatsoever we ask:" "And we know that we have the petitions that we 
desired of him." This is knowing before the answer has come that He hears us, 
and that the answer will be given. 

The words of our Lord relative to our relationship to Him as being the condition
of answered prayer are these: "If ye abide in me and my words abide in you, ye 
shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you" (Jno. 15:7). 

This is the abiding life, like that revealed in the psalmist's testimony. These 
are dwelling in holy relation with Christ, and His words are dwelling in them. 
In this relationship they are privileged to ask what they will, being assured 
that it shall be done for them. This confirms the promise made, "I will answer 
him." This is shown us from another viewpoint by our Lord in these words: 
"Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you" 
(Jno. 16:23). God promises to do these things for His people that dwell in the 
secret place, "Because He hath known My name. He shall call upon Me, and I will 
answer him." 

To know His name means to bear His name as those who belong to Him. The wife 
bears her husband's name. Children bear the name of their father. God's people 
are in a relationship which gives them the name of God; in His name they 
transact all their business as Christians. 

These scriptures show us the harmony of all truth. The psalmist says that it 
would be the state of all who dwell in the secret place of the Most High to have
a relationship to God which would guarantee to them the answer to all their 
prayers, and place at their disposal all power for service. God made His will to
be the inheritance of a people who elect to dwell in holiness before Him all the 
days of their lives. 

Those who dwell in the secret place shall have many reasons to call upon God. 
"He shall call upon me." This language shows that there will arise many causes 
for the people of God to call upon Him. This is not a state of grace where we 
are independent of God, it is rather one of complete dependence on Him. 
Sanctification reduces one to a state of childlike reliance upon the Heavenly 
Father. 

Dependence on God is shown by the words of the promise to answer the call. Those
who call are needy. The Father knows they have need; but has made it necessary 
that His children call on Him before He will supply it. 

Jesus taught us this when He put the prayer for daily bread in our mouths to 
say. It was not for us to worry about how it should come, for God has assumed 
the responsibility of supplying it; it is ours to ask in faith. 

Dwelling in the secret place of the Most High does not exempt the saints from 
suffering, distresses, privations, wants, trials, afflictions, conflicts, perils
and such like; but it does give them the right to ask for help from the Almighty 
under Whose shadow they dwell. He has assured them that He will aid them if they 
call. Those who lose sight of their utter dependence on God for all things, and 
undertake to fight their own battles without calling on Him, will find 
themselves fighting their battles unaided by Him. To live in the holy place 
everything must be by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, and the peace 
of God which passeth all understanding will keep the heart and mind. Do this and
live where anxiety cannot trouble the heart. 

If the wise Father permits things to befall us which force us to call upon Him, 
then all the things which happen to us are but so many instructors teaching us 
to trust in Him, and revealing His gracious care for our souls and bodies. He 
shall never be wearied by our coming, nor will He show reluctance to give; like 
a willing Father, He delights to answer our prayers. 

There is no such thing as an unanswered prayer. "I will answer him," is the 
promise. God places Himself under obligations in His will to answer the prayers 
of His people; The conditions. He has imposed have been met by all who dwell in 
the holy place. They abide under the shadow of the Almighty, and benefit by 
every promise in the will of God. 

There will be times when the answer to prayer is delayed; but no time when it 
will be denied. It may require time for God to work; but He will surely work it 
in time. It may not be the lot of some to see the answer to their prayer 
fulfilled in their lifetime, but the forces set in motion by their prayers will 
not end with their day; they shall have their desire, some time, some where. Let
every saint pray the prayer of faith, and be still, and know that He is God. 

There are some things which God cannot do though He be willing to do them. When 
prayer touches upon these things, the answer given is not a refusal, it is often
a revelation. That is, God will show us that the conditions are such that He 
cannot consistently work. This arises in cases where prayer is offered for the 
salvation of persons: it is His will to save all men; but not His will to save 
them against their wills. When He shows us this we must fully acquiesce, and 
cease to ask of the matter. Change the order of asking to that of prayer for 
conviction, and He will answer. God can and will convict persons against their 
wills; He will offer them a place of repentance. He will give life to them who 
have not sinned unto death. If they cannot be saved the Spirit will lift all 
burden from the soul of the petitioner. 

A prayer may be answered by the Lord giving a substitute instead of what was 
asked. In the case of Paul asking that his thorn be removed. God gave him grace, 
but did not remove the thorn. Some persons would be more content if they would
receive grace as a substitute for their affliction, and permit God to receive 
greater glory by their patience in them. 

God's strength is made perfect in weakness. The more of His grace required by us
because of weakness the more do we see His manifested love and care. Perfect 
health may tend to make us self-relying; where affliction may cause us to rely 
on Him. Abundance of things may make us self-sufficient, where poverty will make
us see Christ as our sufficiency in all things. 

It often proves that what we wanted was not what we needed. God was pleased to 
give what we needed as a substitute for what we wanted. The assurance that He 
will answer when we call is no assurance that the answer may be dictated by us. 
It is God's right to answer as He sees fit, and in the manner which will enhance
His glory. Our part is to receive with thanksgivings what He gives, recognizing
it to be the answer we should receive. 





I WILL BE WITH HIM IN TROUBLE 

This promise assures those who dwell in the secret place of the Most High that 
they shall be overshadowed by the Almighty in the time of trouble. The holy 
people are not exempt from sufferings in this world; but God has made provision 
for their comfort in troubles. They are comforted and sustained by His Presence. 
"I will be with him in trouble." This implies that God will share the sufferings 
of His people; He companions with them in their troubles. 





HE WILL BE WITH THEM IN ALL KINDS OF TROUBLE 

Trouble rises from many causes. The same kind of trouble does not come to all 
holy persons. Different surroundings produce different troubles. Some have 
troubles peculiar to their home life. They never receive a word of encouragement
from those with whom they live. They have no sympathy offered by relatives, but
rather, as in many cases, they are nagged and persecuted because of their 
religion. Others have troubles peculiar to the circumstances under which they 
work. They may hold positions where they are thrown in the company of 
unregenerate persons who cause them serious trials by their wickedness. With 
others their troubles may come from physical causes. They suffer from 
afflictions constantly, and hardly know a day without pain. Yet others have 
troubles by sorrows which have come by death in their family. One sorrow follows
close upon another until many have passed over them through the years. Some may
have troubles caused by their children's wickedness. The power of the world has
seized upon the children for whom many prayers have been offered, and it seems 
that despite all prayers, the world will curse them. 

In these troubles God has promised to be with His people. He is not there as a 
disinterested spectator; He is there to lend support to the troubled. 





GOD DOES NOT PREVENT THE COMING OF TROUBLE, BUT HE DOES PREVENT US 
FROM BEING OVERCOME BY TROUBLES 

The fact that He is present in trouble is an assurance of victory. He is there 
for the purpose of giving sufficient help to master the troubles. Happy are the 
people who have such a Companion in the midst of trouble. 

According to the promise of divine help in time of trouble, the troubles of the 
saints are to bring to them manifestations of God. Peter's trouble caused by 
being imprisoned resulted in a manifestation of God's care for him; and a 
manifestation of God's power to the praying believers. The troubles of Paul 
resulted in manifestations of God which have blessed the saints of all time. 

There is a difference between the abiding presence of God in the soul, and the 
manifested Presence of God in life. The abiding Presence in the soul is 
something that is constant and unchanged; it is the result of holiness, and is 
the source of rejoicing in full assurance of hope. But a manifestation of the 
Presence of God in life does not remain longer than the present need of the 
trusting person. The angel of the Lord did not stay with Peter longer than to 
accomplish the task of deliverance from his trouble. The earthquake did not last
all night when God delivered Paul and Silas. 

There are special manifestations of God which troubles of a peculiar nature 
bring. In times of severe troubles the saints have seen God manifest His Power 
in their behalf and deliver them in a moment of time. Every holy person may rely
upon Him in all such times. He will be with them suddenly as He was with the 
three Hebrew children in the furnace of fire. 

There are some troubles which nag and pain the saints; in all such troubles God 
manifests Himself in a soothing and comforting manner, rather than in an 
earthquake. Under His feathers shalt thou trust in such times of troubles. 
Whatsoever the nature of the trouble there is grace for it to be given the 
trusting child of God. The promise is as great as the need. Cast all your cares 
upon Him; for He careth for you. Roll thy burden on the Lord; and fret not 
thyself in any wise to do evil in the midst of trouble. 





FELLOWSHIP WITH CHRIST MEANS FELLOWSHIP IN HIS SUFFERINGS 

This truth is inferred from the promise, I will be with him in trouble." God 
knew that the world and the devil would make trouble for the man who chose to 
dwell in holy fellowship with Him. There could be no escape from troubles, so 
long as sin was in the world. The disciple is not above his Lord in this matter. 
What our Lord had to suffer for righteousness' sake so shall His people suffer. 
He pronounces a blessing upon all who for His sake are made to suffer trouble. 
Their reward in heaven is great. If we suffer with Him we shall also reign with 
Him; being partakers of His affliction we shall also partake of the consolation. 

The perfect sympathy of Jesus is the consolation of the saints in time of 
trouble. "We have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of
our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin." 

It is human nature to want sympathy in times of trouble. Only those who have 
passed through like troubles can perfectly sympathize with others in their 
troubles. Jesus fellowships with His people in their troubles, and is touched by
them because He has been tempted in like manner. The wisdom of saints is in 
knowing this. The tendency in the time of trouble is toward self pity. One is 
likely to feel that no one cares for his soul. Those who dwell in the secret 
place of the Most High shall abide under the overshadowing of His love which 
perfectly sympathizes with them. It is a kind of sympathy which imparts help in 
the time of trouble. It feels the pain, and provides the consolation for the 
hurt. 

Jesus shows us that he feels the very things that trouble us: "Inasmuch as ye 
did unto the least of these, ye did it unto me." The point is here, that He felt
the ministries offered to His people, and He likewise felt the slights and 
neglect with them. Their hunger, and thirst, and nakedness, sickness, and 
persecutions, He had felt. These troubles had not been suffered alone by His 
brethren. He had been with them in the troubles. When no man gave unto them, He 
felt it as they felt it. What further assurance need we than the promise, "I 
will be with him in trouble." It is sufficient to stimulate the faith of all 
believers for all time; and cause them to trust Him to fulfill it in the time of
trouble. 






RESTING IN THE TIME OF TROUBLE IS A TOKEN OF HOPE 

(You who are troubled rest with us" (2 Thess. 1:5-10). The fact that one rests 
his troubles with God to avenge him, is a manifest token of the righteous 
judgment of God which shall prove him worthy of the kingdom for which he 
suffers. This is resting in hope of the coming of the Lord, Who shall recompense 
tribulation to them that trouble His people. Their troubling of the saints shall
constitute a major offense to be punished when He is revealed. Vengeance belongs 
unto God. "I will repay, saith the Lord." Then let those who are troubled rest. 
Let them not murmur and retaliate lest they suffer spiritual loss. Commit the 
keeping of the soul unto Him as unto a Faithful Creator, resting in perfect 
faith for help that ye may endure to the end. Keep a good conscience; and show a 
meek and quiet spirit. He is coming to be admired in all them that believe, and 
are found in faith at that day. 





I WILL DELIVER HIM, AND HONOR HIM 

This promise evidently refers to the resurrection and glorification of the 
saints. That day will be the day of deliverance with honor. In the promise of 
deliverance which God has made to His people is included their preservation from
evils in the world, and their complete deliverance from the results of evil in 
the day of redemption. Both phases of deliverance are promised in this perfect 
will of God as shown in this psalm. In the work of Christ in present salvation 
He delivers His people from the power and inbeing of sin; and preserves them 
blameless unto His coming. But in this promise we see that they shall be 
delivered from death, and all the marks and scars of sin which they have borne, 
together with all infirmities. He shall give them a place of honor at His right 
hand. They shall never more be sick, neither shall they suffer hunger, or 
thirst, cold or heat: the former things shall have passed away. Old age shall 
not steal upon them through the rolling ages, neither shall pain or sorrow mar 
their eternal happiness. They shall have the inheritance which is incorruptible, 
undefiled, and that fadeth not away, which He has reserved for all who have been
kept by the power of God through faith unto that salvation ready to be revealed
in the last time. 

Death has held sway over the race since the fall of Adam. It has without respect
of persons, age or sex, overcome the children of Eve, and laid them in the dust
of earth a vanquished race. But One came from glory, passed through the judgment 
hall, took upon himself the sins of men because He loved men, and upon the cross 
died that men might live. He laid down His life, but took it up again from the 
tomb and thereby pledged life from the dead to all who would accept Him as a 
Deliverer. Despite all this which He hath done, death slays its prey with 
relentless fury, and triumphs over saint and sinner alike. But the promise is, 
'I will deliver him, and honor him." God has not given up the task, neither has 
He forgotten His promise to deliver them, who all their lifetime have been in 
bondage to the fear of death. That day will surely come when all that are in the
grave shall hear His voice, and shall come forth to the resurrection of life. No 
power can hold them forever in the tomb. He shall speak and the dead shall hear 
his voice, and arise from the dust to the place of honor which is reserved for 
His saints. 







WITH LONG LIFE WILL I SATISFY HIM 

This is the promise of eternal life. Life that shall prove long enough to 
satisfy will be eternal in its duration. The deepest desire in the human breast 
is the desire to live. Man clings to this brief span of life with tenacity. Much
labor has been given toward the lengthening of the period of life in this world 
because of the strong desire to live. Does it not argue that if there is 
naturally in the heart of man a desire to live, that satisfaction of that desire
must be some where? "I am come that ye might have life," are words of hope to a
stricken race. Who of all the visitors on this earth has offered to do so much 
for man as that promise offers? If life is not in Christ, then life is nowhere 
to be obtained; and death shall stalk the earth forever an unconquered foe. Many
have fled to Him for refuge, and from Him have taken hope as an anchor of the 
soul. "With long life will I satisfy him," is the promise made to him who dwells
in the secret place of the most High. God shall overshadow him with grace and 
power. He shall not see death as the wicked shall see it. Death shall not be 
doom, it shall not hold fear and darkness. God shall give satisfaction in long 
life. 

The promise has proven to many that God gives long life to those who serve Him 
in this world. The righteous have a better chance for length of days than the 
wicked. A Christian life enjoins a manner of deportment which makes for long 
life. The blasting habits which kill off the wicked are not indulged by the 
saints. The worries and cares of life are not felt by His people as they are by 
the wicked. Sorrows are comforted, pain is eased. Love rules with peace in the 
soul, and hatred and strife are banished from the heart. The saints do not have 
to be stimulated by strong drink, nor excited by plays and entertainments. They 
are Spirit filled, and God-honored and need no such things to afford pleasures. 
Godliness is profitable in all things; having promise of the life which now is, 
and of that which is to come. 





I WILL SHOW HIM MY SALVATION 

This is the promise of final salvation in heaven. That which has been the hope 
of the saints of all ages. It is the grand finale in God's program for the 
redemption of man. The last thing in the perfect will of God for His people is 
their eternal salvation. He has promised that they shall see it. To see it means
that they shall come to realize it and enjoy it forever. Their last battle has 
been fought; their last day of trial has passed; their period of waiting has 
ended, and home is reached at last. 

Every promise unfolded in this psalm has been a step toward this grand end for 
the redeemed. The wonderful care shown by the Father in preserving His children 
has been exercised with this end in view that they should see His salvation. The
 exalting of them to high privileges, and vesting them with authority, was to 
result in this final ending in heaven and life. His promise to answer when they 
should call was made in order that they may gain this reward. The pledge of 
divine presence in trouble was an assurance that the Almighty wanted them to 
come to His eternal glory as a compensation for their sufferings for His sake. 
The resurrection with honor was the climax of His miracle working power in 
destroying death, and giving life to all of His sons who had rested in the 
grave. The deep longing of His people for life was met by the gift of eternal 
life through Jesus Christ our Lord, and that life should be spent in the glory 
of His presence forever, because He has planned to show them his salvation. Thus 
the perfect will of God is made in behalf of all who will dwell in the secret 
place of the Most High. He assumes full responsibility for them in the promise 
that they shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. This overshadowing is 
embraced in the seven phases of the will of God revealed in this Psalm. It is 
the inheritance of the sanctified ones who dwell in the light of His countenance
in holy love. 

He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under the 
shadow of the Almighty. 





HOW TO ENTER INTO THE SECRET PLACE OF THE MOST HIGH 

The simple conditions to be met by those who would enter into the secret place 
of the Most High are revealed in the second verse of the psalm. "I will say of 
the Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress: my God; in Him will I trust." This is
a confession of faith, showing us that we have access into this place by faith. 

As we have seen the secret place of the Most High is in the Holy of holies where
God's Presence dwells; and that this place is a type of the experience of grace
which the new covenant should open to all the people of God wherein they might 
dwell in His Presence all the days of their lives. This experience reduced to 
its simple terms is the experience of sanctification. Those who enter into it 
have entered into the inheritance of the saints in light. 

The question of how to enter into the secret place of the Most High is simply a 
question of how to enter into the experience of sanctification. The conditions 
to be met by all who enter into this experience are clearly set forth in the 
words of the verse under consideration. In it we shall find the workings of that
faith necessary to enter into this grace. 





IT IS A FAITH WHICH SEES THE PROMISED EXPERIENCE 

No one can enter into an experience of grace if he doubts the possibilities of 
such an experience. If any look upon the grace of sanctification as being an 
ideal toward which they are to aim, but never hope to fully attain in this life 
then they are in no condition to obtain anything 'from the Lord. 

The promise must be seen with the eye of faith, no doubt about such an 
experience being possible in this world must enter the mind. Every doctrine 
which denies it must be renounced as false; and every argument against it must 
be discredited. All who are eligible to enter this Holy place are fully 
persuaded by the truth of the promise. 



Two witnesses in this psalm bear testimony of this blessed and happy state, and 
this convinces and convicts the speaker of the words of this confession of 
faith.The two witnesses are God and David. David gives his testimony to 
holiness. " He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide 
under the shadow of the Almighty." God bears witness to the truth of this by 
confirming the testimony of David, and then unfolding the benefits of the grace 
by revealing His perfect will in the last three verses of the psalm. 

These two witnesses so convince the third party of verse two that he immediately
confesses his faith in the fact of such an experience, and expresses 
determination to enter into it. "He is my refuge and fortress," is the cry of 
faith. Faith now sees the refuge and fortress of the soul. Those who see this 
are ready to make the next step of faith. 





CHOOSING BY FAITH TO ENTER THE EXPERIENCE OF HOLINESS 

At this point the cost is counted, and a deliberate choice is made to enter in 
at all costs. Mark the words: "I will say of the Lord, He is my God." This is a 
choosing to make the Lord our all and all. He is to be God over all to us, and 
in us. This means separation from all that forbids such an act of the will. 
Persons that we love, be they friends or relatives, if they hinder us from 
obtaining God as our possession, then we separate from them, and go with God. It
was by this kind of faith that Moses made his choice; he renounced the pleasures 
of sin, and refused the honor and riches of Egypt, choosing rather to suffer 
affliction with the people of God. He had respect unto the recompence of the 
reward. He made this choice by faith before he took a hoof out of Egypt. This is 
an example of complete separation necessary to be made by all who see the 
promise by faith. Many who are convinced of the truth of the blessing never 
enter into it because they have never made a deliberate choice to separate from 
all and have it at all costs. This state of affairs constitutes a serious 
problem to the ministry of this truth to the church. It is not so much the need 
to convince persons that there is such an experience as sanctification, as it is
to get them to pay the price and seek it. This kind of faith is difficult to 
inspire among believers. Jesus suffered without the gate to make possible the 
sanctification of the people, but those who avail themselves of its merits must 
go unto Him without the camp hearing His reproach. They must choose the reproach
before they can be cleansed by the blood. They must go unto Him, thus separate 
from all in the city and church, in order to possess His grace of holiness. 





FAITH BRINGS CONSCIOUS EXPERIENCE 

By this we mean that faith achieves the knowledge of that which it believes. 
When this person said, "I will say of the Lord, He is my God," he showed 
determination to possess the Lord as his God. His faith appropriated the 
promise, and God become his possession. Faith then achieves a knowledge of 
possessing God. 

Many have confessed to this writer that they have never been satisfied with 
their profession of holiness because it has not resulted in the knowledge of God
which they desired. There can be no satisfaction where such a condition exists. 
If the thing for which we have believed did not materialize into an experienced 
reality then something was amiss in our faith. For how can we believe a thing 
has been done for us unless we know it has been done? Seekers after holiness are 
told to take it by faith; this is scriptural. But it is certain that something 
should come to the believer that will assure him that faith has obtained the 
experience sought. 

We have heard it said to seekers after sanctification that they are just 'to 
believe that they have it, and they have h. This is utterly false. Such can only
serve to deceive persons who are sincere. How can any person believe he has a 
thing when his own intelligence says he does not? This is self-deception. 

The truth is that those who would enter this grace must have in view the 
possessing of God. He has promised to give Himself to them. "The Lord whom ye 
seek shall suddenly come to His temple." To receive the Holy Ghost means to 
receive a Person. The coming of this Person results in a definite knowledge to 
the believer. 

The purpose of separation and consecration is to clear the way for faith to 
appropriate God. Faith cannot act until these things have been completed. When 
the person says, "I will say of the Lord, He is my God," this means he has 
chosen to meet every condition necessary to his faith can achieve this end. When
these conditions are fully met (the Spirit will show us when they are met), then 
faith can act freely, and resting upon the promise, it holds God to His promise, 
and He will surely fulfill it, and reveal Himself to the heart. 





THE NATURE OF THE FAITH WHICH RESULTS IN CONSCIOUS EXPERIENCE 

We have shown that faith brings a real experience of a conscious possession of 
God. We have shown that to possess Him means to benefit by all His will as 
revealed in the psalm. This is simply saying again that the results of 
sanctification cannot be enjoyed until we have entered into the experience, any 
more than we can have all that God possesses without first possessing Him. The 
essential thing is to make the Lord our God; He will then place all He is and 
has at our command. 

The nature of the faith which achieves this end must be clearly understood if we
would enter into the' secret place of the Most High, and abide under the shadow
of the Almighty. Because it is so simple many persons fail to see it or 
understand its importance'; and linger long outside of the experience of soul 
cleansing, when they might have entered in immediately. 

The nature of this faith by which we enter into this experience' is shown in 
these words of the second verse: "In Him will I trust." After he sees the 
possibility of such an experience; and after he determines to enter into it at 
all costs; and after he sees he must make the Lord his God, he says, "In Him 
will I trust." Between the belief that He will do it, and the knowledge that He 
has done it, is the faith that trusts Him to do it. It is this faith that many 
seekers after holiness fail to see. 

Suppose it were necessary for a man to be operated upon to save his life. First 
he must believe the surgeon is able to do it. He must next present himself at 
the place to have it done. Then he must completely place himself in the 
surgeon's hands to have him do it. It would be folly to insist that he feel the 
work was done before he trusted the surgeon to perform the operation. So it is 
when one comes to God to be sanctified; he must first believe God is willing to 
do it; then present himself to have it done; then place himself in God's hands 
to have Him do the work in the heart. 

Many have said to me; "I want to know I have the experience before I say I have 
it." This is natural, for how can we truthfully say we are sanctified unless we 
know we are? But the fatal mistake being made by these persons is, they insist 
on knowing it is done before they have trusted God to do it. He cannot witness 
to what is not true. He cannot do the work until there has been complete 
abandonment to Him to have it done. This is not asking persons to profess what 
they do not have, that is fatal. It is not professing something, it is imposing 
self upon God so He can do something in the heart. This is all-important. At 
this point the whole of self yields to Christ the Lord. We do not trust to our 
feelings, but to the blood. We do not ask to feel, we ask to be cleansed so we 
can feel and know. At the moment of trust the Spirit acts and the heart is 
cleansed, then we enter into conscious experience of holiness. 

There is a gap between a completed consecration and the knowledge of the 
experience of heart holiness in which many sincere persons are living. They have
done all they know to do in their consecration, but they have not entered into 
the grace of sanctification. They do not know its joys nor feel its cleansing. 

The way out of this place of dissatisfaction is by faith that trusts Him to 
sanctify as one would trust a surgeon to operate. Such a faith lets God act. 

In the Ephesian letter we find the order of this faith given by the apostle as 
he shows the way to obtain true holiness. Mark his words: "Put off the old man 
which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; and be renewed in the spirit 
of your mind; and that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in 
righteousness and true holiness." 

We first put off the old Man. This is separation unto holiness, and complete 
consecration to God. Then we are to be renewed in the spirit of the mind. This 
is done by the Spirit of God; and is the sanctifying act of God. Then we put on 
the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness. It 
is plainly shown that between the putting off of the old man and the putting on 
of the new that the work of renovating the spirit, or cleansing the soul is 
done. Unless there is faith for this work in the soul there can be no faith for 
the new man of true holiness. It is this step of faith that many have 
overlooked, and because of it have never received the experience of holiness in 
truth. It is therefore essential that all seekers after holiness trust God to do 
the work so they may enter into the Holy place where God dwells. 

When the soul has been sanctified and enters into the secret place of the Most 
High to dwell he must then exercise that faith which rests on conscious 
experience in order to abide under the shadow of the Almighty. He must ever say, 
"In Him will I trust." It is not the trust now that brings him into the place; 
it is the trust that enables him to abide. The just shall live by faith. 

We not only obtain the life of holiness by faith in Him, but we continue in the 
life by faith in Him. The abiding life is a life of perfect trust in Him at all 
times, and for all things. All things pertaining to life and godliness are 
promised to His saints. They are to have no fears or doubts about His 
faithfulness to give them at all times. 

We have shown the seven phases of the will of God in this psalm. The faith which
ever trusts Him, must be that kind which rests on His promises as contained in 
this will. In Him must we trust for deliverance in every trial of life. In Him 
must we trust for power to perform all duties pertaining to our life as lived 
for His glory. In Him must we trust for answered prayers, in nothing wavering. 
Be strong in faith considering that He is able to do exceeding abundantly above 
all we can ask or think. We must trust in Him in time of trouble, and by faith 
look for Him to be with us even as He hath promised. 

Our faith must be strong until the day of death. We must die in the faith, 
believing that He shall raise us up with power, and honor us with glory in that 
day. Let faith for eternal life never waver though many discouragements may 
come, and darker grow the day in which we live. He shall satisfy our heart's 
desire with long life. Through faith we shall come to final salvation because 
faithful is He that has called to His eternal glory. Let us ever say, "In Him 
will I trust." Such as do this from the heart shall abide under the shadow of 
the Almighty. 





THE END 